(6) Lady Lovelace's Objection
Our most detailed information of Babbage's Analytical Engine comes from a memoir by 
Lady Lovelace ( 1842). In it she states, "The Analytical Engine has no pretensions to 
originate anything. It can do whatever we know how to order it to perform" (her italics). 
This statement is quoted by Hartree ( 1949) who adds: "This does not imply that it may 
not be possible to construct electronic equipment which will 'think for itself,' or in which, 
in biological terms, one could set up a conditioned reflex, which would serve as a basis 
for 'learning.' Whether this is possible in principle or not is a stimulating and exciting 
question, suggested by some of these recent developments But it did not seem that the 
machines constructed or projected at the time had this property." 
I am in thorough agreement with Hartree over this. It will be noticed that he does not 
assert that the machines in question had not got the property, but rather that the evidence 
available to Lady Lovelace did not encourage her to believe that they had it. It is quite 
possible that the machines in question had in a sense got this property. For suppose that 
some discrete-state machine has the property. The Analytical Engine was a universal 
digital computer, so that, if its storage capacity and speed were adequate, it could by 
suitable programming be made to mimic the machine in question. Probably this argument 
did not occur to the Countess or to Babbage. In any case there was no obligation on them 
to claim all that could be claimed. 
This whole question will be considered again under the heading of learning machines. 
A variant of Lady Lovelace's objection states that a machine can "never do anything 
really new." This may be parried for a moment with the saw, "There is nothing new under 
the sun." Who can be certain that "original work" that he has done was not simply the 
growth of the seed planted in him by teaching, or the effect of following well-known 
general principles. A better variant of the objection says that a machine can never "take 
us by surprise." This statement is a more direct challenge and can be met directly. 
Machines take me by surprise with great frequency. This is largely because I do not do 
sufficient calculation to decide what to expect them to do, or rather because, although I 
do a calculation, I do it in a hurried, slipshod fashion, taking risks. Perhaps I say to 
myself, "I suppose the Voltage here ought to he the same as there: anyway let's assume it 
is." Naturally I am often wrong, and the result is a surprise for me for by the time the 
experiment is done these assumptions have been forgotten. These admissions lay me 
open to lectures on the subject of my vicious ways, but do not throw any doubt on my 
credibility when I testify to the surprises I experience. 
I do not expect this reply to silence my critic. He will probably say that h surprises are 
due to some creative mental act on my part, and reflect no credit on the machine. This 
leads us back to the argument from consciousness, and far from the idea of surprise. It is 
a line of argument we must consider closed, but it is perhaps worth remarking that the 
appreciation of something as surprising requires as much of a "creative mental act" 
whether the surprising event originates from a man, a book, a machine or anything else. 
The view that machines cannot give rise to surprises is due, I believe, to a fallacy to 
which philosophers and mathematicians are particularly subject. This is the assumption 
that as soon as a fact is presented to a mind all consequences of that fact spring into the 
mind simultaneously with it. It is a very useful assumption under many circumstances, 
but one too easily forgets that it is false. A natural consequence of doing so is that one 
then assumes that there is no virtue in the mere working out of consequences from data 
and general principles. 